From The New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> In the wake of the monumental Supreme
Court ruling striking [music] down
President Trump's tariffs, the entire
world is scrambling to understand what
[music] comes next. Will countries back
away from the massive deals they made
with Trump? Will companies get refunds
for the billions they've already spent
[music] on tariffs?
And will Trump actually be constrained
by any of this?
Today, my [music] colleagues Tyler
Pager, Ana Swanson, and Andrew Ross
Sorkin explain.
>> [music]
>> It's Monday, February 23rd.
Tyler, you cover the White House.
Andrew, you cover corporate America.
Ana, you cover trade. Thank you all for
joining me on this Sunday afternoon.
Thanks so much, Natalie. Thanks for
having us. Yeah, glad to be here. So, to
catch us up from where we left things on
Friday with the massive news that the
Supreme Court had invalidated most of
the administration's tariffs, we saw
Trump respond first by putting in place
a new 10% tariff on imports across the
board, and then jacking it up to 15%
over the weekend. We're going to get
into the specifics of that today. But,
just to start, what have the reactions
been in the worlds that you all cover?
Tyler, I want to start with you. Take us
inside the reaction from the White
House.
On Friday morning, the president was
speaking to a group of governors in the
East Room of the White House when
Jamieson Greer, the trade
representative, handed him a note
alerting him to the Supreme Court's
decision. The president told the
governors it was a disgrace. He lashed
out at the Supreme Court. Hm. And
quickly wrapped up that meeting and
left. And he was irate. He met with
advisors and then we saw that full-blown
anger on display in the White House
briefing room a few hours later. And for
Trump, this wasn't just a political
loss, but a personal one, too. He has
been obsessed with tariffs as an
economic tool for decades, long before
his political career. And so this felt
like a real personal loss to something
he deeply believes in.
And Anna, how has the international
community responded?
So, obviously this had been somewhat
expected for other countries that were
following the Supreme Court ruling, but
it has still caused a lot of immediate
doubt and confusion with countries that
have been agonizing about these tariffs
all year. So, you had countries that had
just finalized their trade deal the day
before. Now the underlying terms of
trade, the tariffs that those deals are
based on, are gone and replaced with
something entirely different. And some
of those countries have made concessions
that are controversial with their own
people. So, this is just introduced a
lot of uncertainty for the months to
come.
And Andrew, what about the corporate
world?
The Trump administration's tariff effort
is probably the most significant shift
in global trade in decades and really is
the most important sort of rethink about
how the United States trades with other
countries, how US corporations operate
in other countries, how international
companies operate in our countries. I
mean, it is everything. I spent the
weekend talking to business leaders and
CEOs, many of whom really have
rescrambled their entire supply chains
over the last 6 months, made commitments
to bring manufacturing back to the
United States, switched manufacturing
plants from places like China to India
to other places,
thought that they had remapped what
their true costs were going to be,
and are now looking at this saying, "Oh
my goodness, what comes next?" Mhm.
I think all of these companies are
spending the weekend trying to think
through all of this
with a sense though that this is going
to be a very long-term fight, whatever
it is.
Okay. So, there's a lot of confusion
with companies and countries trying to
sort out what all this uncertainty means
for them.
Tyler, the administration has obviously
been preparing for this moment for a
while. It's been clear that the Supreme
Court was skeptical of these tariffs
long before the actual ruling, but the
response from the White House has still
seemed pretty chaotic. First, the 10%,
then the 15%. Do we have any idea what's
behind that sense of chaos?
Yeah, it was quite a whiplash over just
less than 24 hours where the president
came out to the briefing room and
announced these 10% tariffs. Later that
evening Friday, he signed the official
paperwork instituting those 10% tariffs,
and then Saturday morning he announces
this 15% tariff on social media. And
what I will tell you, Natalie, is that
many of the president's advisers and
people close to the White House were
surprised and taken aback by the rapid
change from 10 to 15%. Some have
speculated that the president was
frustrated by the media coverage of his
loss at the Supreme Court and wanted to
show that he still had power to raise
tariffs even more. But we have not heard
from the president since then about
precisely why he made this change less
than 24 hours later.
I do think there's um an important point
there just to jump in. So, you know, as
some people had speculated earlier that
maybe they would save that extra 5%
increase and use it as leverage or
negotiation later.
But, at 15% the rate does get you close
to what it was overall before. So, at
10% it was a little bit lower than they
the rate had been previously. Now, it's
like pretty close. So, within an average
percentage point of what it was before.
Of course, this one is flat, whereas the
previous rate a lot by country. So,
there are huge differences for different
countries.
Right. Right. And just to jump off that,
I want to understand, Anna, what you've
been reporting on, which is the options
that the administration is pursuing now
outside of just the 15% tariff. Can you
ground us here? Give us a kind of sober
explanation of what the administration
has in store for us.
Yeah, absolutely. So, there was always a
plan B because before plan A, the
president was presented with this menu
of options for his tariffs. And he had
chosen this International Emergency
Economic Powers Act because it was the
most flexible. It allowed him to raise
and lower tariffs at a whim. But, he
always had a lot of other options. And
in fact, you know, some of his advisers
preferred those other options because
they were less vulnerable to a court
challenge.
>> Right. So, now he's kind of going back
to the that original playbook, right?
And so, there are a few different
authorities. One important one is called
Section 301. It's run by the Office of
the United States Trade Representative.
They'll carry out investigations into
unfair trade practices and can levy
tariffs that way. It's what the
president used against China in his
first term.
He also has another called Section 232,
which allows for tariffs on the basis of
national security and there are a lot of
tariffs that have been levied that way
as well.
So, the administration has put in place
this 15% tariff for now that's a flat
rate for the world. Those tariffs expire
in 5 months and if Trump wants to extend
them, he needs the approval of Congress
which seems pretty unlikely at this
point given that midterms are coming up
and voters are concerned about
affordability and tariffs adding to
costs.
And just to say the midterms and the
fact that the tariffs largely aren't
actually popular with voters, that's
actually part of the calculus for the
business community as they consider
their plans because they're looking at
all these tariffs and they're wondering
given the politics of this moment
are these tariffs still going to be here
in 6 months? Because in truth
the view is that if these tariffs are
not going to exist come this fall, the
whole game
gets re-scrambled. It changes completely
all over again.
And so it's going to be very interesting
to see whether companies tip their hand
and really tell us what they're going to
do, whether they're going to be willing
to
really talk about what their plans are
next as they're making them.
And Andrew makes a great point because
this is of utmost importance to the
president himself. I was just with the
president in Georgia on Thursday where
he was touting these various business
executives who told him that they were
moving manufacturing or expanding
manufacturing in the United States
because of his tariffs. This is of
personal pride to the president so if
companies are changing their plans or
making new plans, they run the risk of
some sort of retribution campaign from
the president who feels extremely proud
of the impact he believes tariffs are
having in reshaping the American economy
and reviving the manufacturing sector.
Okay, Andrew, I want to talk about the
future may hold for these companies, but
I have to ask. It seems as though the
corporate world that you cover has been
really focused on the question of what
this decision means about the tariffs
they've already paid, about the past,
whether and how they might get refunds
on the billions in costs they've already
racked up. What do we know about that?
So, look, you you can look at companies
like Toyota, which recently attributed
about $8 billion of losses to the
tariffs. Ford said that the
tariff-related charges cost them $2
billion in 2025. They're expecting over
a billion dollars in 2026. General
Motors is in somewhat of a similar camp.
So, there are a lot of businesses that
have been impacted by this that they can
look directly at those losses and say
they want that money back.
There's a real question about whether
they can get that money back, how the
refund process works, when you actually
have to sue effectively or put in for
the refund. You might need to do it
relatively quickly, which also means you
have to do it publicly. Mhm. Again, this
question of when you publicly seek a
refund, what does that ultimately also
mean for your business if it's regulated
in some other way by the US government,
and if you're concerned at all about the
administration somehow coming back at
you in another way. Retaliating. You're
You're saying basically there may be
some risk for these businesses in
confronting the president on this.
You know, this administration has
aggressively pursued companies in so
many different ways, whether it be law
firms, or you can look at some of the
big media companies. There's so many
other instances where they have used
their regulatory powers against
corporations that they did not believe
were quote unquote on side, if you will,
with this administration. And therefore,
I think there's a big question about you
know, whether some of these companies
will seek refunds or not.
Anna, you regularly talk to small
businesses who have been affected by the
tariffs.
I wonder whether they are at a
disadvantage in terms of getting refunds
given everything that's involved. What
are you hearing?
Yeah, absolutely. So, small businesses
tend to have fewer resources. They can't
hire the high-priced lawyers, the
lobbyists to come in and talk to the
Trump administration. And that has
really made a difference in how
different industries and companies have
been treated over the past year. And I
think, you know, one thing is that this
tariff system has just added this huge
amount of complexity for businesses to
deal with, and that takes resources. I
hear from companies all the time that
instead of doing, you know, their
business, they're spending time figuring
out these tariffs. And so, that's a big
cost for companies.
It's hard to describe just how
complicated the Trump's tariff system
was. Before the Supreme Court ruling,
there were different rates for different
countries, different products. Now that
is all gone. It's replaced with an
entirely very different set system of
tariffs. There's a 150-day clock running
on that with big questions about what is
going to replace it. And all that
uncertainty is just it's bad for
investment. I mean, companies are not
going to want to invest billions of
dollars in a factory that will take
years to build if tariff policy is going
to change dramatically in the next few
months. Okay, we're going to get to
those bigger implications. Andrew, I
have what may seem like a technical
question for you. We talked on the show
before about the question surrounding
who was actually paying for the tariffs.
Were the companies eating the cost, or
were they passing it on to consumers? If
the companies raised prices because of
tariffs, can they actually legitimately
get refunds?
You are asking what may be the $175
billion question.
Which is to say,
>> [snorts]
>> there is an argument that may be made by
this administration in court if a
company comes to seek a refund.
It is possible that the administration
will argue
that they effectively raised prices,
didn't suffer or subject themselves
therefore to a loss, and therefore
effectively have no standing to collect
a refund.
And Tyler, how is the administration
thinking about this question of
companies potentially demanding massive
refunds?
Natalie, they're not really seeming to
think about it all that much at all. We
saw Treasury Secretary Scott Passant say
he didn't think that the American people
would see this money, and the president
at his news conference on Friday
basically ignored questions about
refunds. And so, even as reporters
repeatedly tried to press him, he has
very much quickly moved on and has
started talking about new tariffs that
he wants to institute. And there doesn't
seem to be a whole lot of consideration
about what this process may look like
should companies start requesting them.
Yeah, I think it's pretty clear that
they're not going to be very
enthusiastic about paying that money
back. The question is how, you know,
cooperative they are with any eventual
court order. Um it will really be up to
the administration to set up this system
for refunds, and that could be, you
know, it could be a an easy process if
they wanted to make it that way, or it
could be kind of a nightmare for
companies.
You know, honestly, I I wouldn't be
surprised if it's months or even years
by the time this process plays out in
court, by the time this system is set up
and companies actually get that money in
their hands. Can I just say, part of the
political decision by this
administration to pursue tariffs the way
he did
was because
of the expectation that even if they
were overturned, it would be very
difficult to get the refunds back.
>> Hm, you're saying it was part of the
design.
All of this was part of the design.
Because by default, it forced these
companies and these countries into this
particular situation. Some of whom have
made commitments, [music]
not just commitments, but have made
investments that are very hard to turn
back on now. [music] Yeah, so
essentially you could see these tariffs
as a year of a kind of corporate tax.
[music]
Is that fair? Some people would call
them a corporate tax. Some people would
call them a tax on consumers. [music]
The administration would call them a tax
on other countries.
After the break, we look at those other
countries [music] and the global fallout
from the tariff ruling.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, Anna, I want to talk about all the
agreements that Trump has reached, all
the deals he's reached with other
countries. Trade deals that everyone
from Europe to Japan has made based on
what have now been deemed illegal
tariffs. Are those deals now moot?
Well, it's still kind of up in the air.
So, countries have agreed to major
concessions over the last few months.
The administration has made initial
trade deals that in a lot of cases are
kind of vague, but you know, still deals
with dozens of countries in which
they've agreed to drop tariffs, make big
investments in the United States.
And now the tariffs that undergird those
are suddenly gone. But you already see
some hesitation on the part of other
countries, you know, that have agreed to
these terms. So, you had officials in
the EU saying recently that they might
pause the ratification of their trade
deal. And the other piece of this is
that this new system, this flat 15%
tariff for everybody, for some countries
feels really, really unfair. Because
they have made a lot of concessions to
the United States in order to lower
their tariff rates. Now they're right
back where everybody else is. So,
countries like Britain and Australia
were at 10%. Now they're at 15% along
with other countries like Vietnam,
Indonesia, India. So, a lot of people in
other countries just questioning whether
they should have made all these
concessions to the president for tariffs
that are not now in effect. But Anna, do
these countries not have the same risks
that we talked about companies having in
terms of, you know, poking the bear,
potentially confronting Trump? Couldn't
that be dangerous for them if he
responds, if he retaliates? Yeah,
absolutely. I think they do have a lot
of risk when it comes to poking the
bear. The president has been restrained
by this Supreme Court ruling. He's not
able to use that emergency power, but he
has a lot of other tariff authorities.
And he can still, you know, levy just
incredible taxes on their imports. So, a
lot of countries are not backing away
from their deals right away. They're
very cognizant that the president has
these other tariff powers that he could
just whack them with if they do decide
to break their agreement. The
administration has also warned other
countries that they will in fact do
that. You know, sometimes it may take
writing a report, or it may take, you
know, a few weeks or months, but he can
still, you know, levy just incredible
taxes on their imports that makes a huge
difference to industries in other
countries that are trying to sell
products to the United States. You know,
the other piece of this is the biggest
country that didn't make a trade deal
with the United States, which is China.
You know, Trump had threatened something
like 125% tariffs on China. He had put
very high tariffs on China before they
were ruled illegal. And now China has
this much lower rate. So, I wonder where
that leaves us. I think this goes back
to the the bigger issue about countries
and companies playing chicken with the
administration. And you could argue that
China has played the best game of
chicken yet because they didn't accept
some kind of higher rate earlier. And
they did try to slow roll and play out
these negotiations as long as possible.
And you heard early on that some
countries had thought about approaching
it that way.
But, there [snorts] became this sort of
view, especially as a couple of
countries early on accepted these deals,
that this was the future. That
irrespective of what the Supreme Court
said, that tariffs in one way or another
are here to stay for some period of
time. That was going to sort of rewrite
the global trade order.
And Natalie, I think we're going to get
a lot more on this front because the
president is expected to travel to
Beijing Yep. at the end of March, early
April, and meet with Xi Jinping. So, we
should expect there to be a lot more
conversation about what the US-China
relationship looks like, particularly as
it pertains to trade, in the weeks
ahead.
So, okay, just thinking about where all
this leaves Trump on the global stage.
Moving forward, obviously the president
now has just lost this major source of
power that he's been relying on. What
the broad tariff authority had given him
was leverage in deal-making, not just on
trade deals, right? But also in his
foreign policy generally.
He's been achieving what he wants around
the world in part by using tariffs as a
cudgel to force countries to the table,
to force him to give him things they
want.
Now he doesn't have that. What impact
does that loss of leverage have? Tyler,
let's start with you. Yeah, it's
enormous. I mean, it was the centerpiece
arguably of his foreign policy. He used
it often for economic reasons, but he
also tried to use it to cut peace deals.
We know that the president is very
determined to win the Nobel Peace Prize.
He repeatedly brags about how many
conflicts he's solved overseas.
And at the core of some of those
strategies was threatening tariffs on
countries if they didn't
in his words lay down their arms and
stop fighting. And so it dramatically
changes his negotiating position on the
world stage because he's unable to as
Anna very clearly laid out apply
different tariff rates to different
countries at a whim. And I think it left
a lot of foreign leaders
uncertain about what move they made and
whether or not they could be punished by
the president for whatever they might
do. That uncertainty has been diminished
in some ways because the president can't
just unilaterally apply different
tariffs to different countries on any
given day. Right. I mean, one one source
said to me that it this takes away
Trump's lightning bolt powers. So his
Zeus-like ability to just, you know,
strike other countries with tariffs. It
doesn't take away the ability to do
tariffs at all. It just requires some
planning. So I think you will continue
to see the president use the threat of
tariffs. It's just you you see the rate
change tomorrow. I think it's also worth
pointing out that the president in
implementing these new tariffs at 15%
across the board is using something
called Section 122. And it is very
possible that
the way he's approaching it even this
time
is going to be brought to court all over
again. Neil Katyal, who was the lawyer
who brought the original case and went
to the Supreme Court and argued it there
successfully now has made this point
over the weekend that there's an
argument potentially that the president
cannot use Section 122 in the way that
he is attempting to. And so we could be
back here 6 months from now again in
front of the Supreme Court over this,
too. That's interesting. You're saying
basically that the authorities that the
president is now using as an alternative
may themselves be challenged. I just
want to push though on something which
is that we're talking about the
president having a weaker hand in
negotiations, being more constrained and
legally that is functionally true,
right? He can no longer just wake up one
day and slap 50% tariffs on major
trading partners.
But I still think though that for a lot
of people it's just hard to believe that
that's actually going to happen when you
see Trump getting up there at his
presser on Friday and essentially saying
that's not going to work. I am going to
find ways to put tariffs in place and
they're going to be even more severe.
This is new for President Trump.
Congress, controlled by Republicans, has
largely gone along with everything he's
wanted to do and the Supreme Court had
not limited his power in any major way
before this decision. And so for the
president it's a moment where he has to
reckon with the checks and balance
inherent in the Constitution
that for most of his first year in
office he has not really felt
constrained by. You're saying this is
something we haven't really seen in any
major way until this ruling and we don't
actually know how Trump is going to
respond.
Yeah, I mean we know that Trump is
immediately responding by trying to put
on these tariffs and just disregarding
Congress which if he really wanted to
pursue these tariffs that he initially
put on he could go down the path of
using the legislative branch.
But right now Trump is not interested in
that. He likes to do things unilaterally
and he likes to do things quickly. And
so this is a significant moment in which
Trump has to readjust to a
real constraint on his power.
Okay, I want to just pull back for a
minute. One thing that does seem clear
is that we are now living in a world
with tariffs. Whether we're talking
about 15% tariffs or higher, the US
seems to have permanently at this point
moved away from truly and absolutely
abiding by free trade principles and
moved toward a definitively more
protectionist and nationalist economy by
default. How should we think about that?
You know, over the next decade
irrespective of what's just happened
here
there is going to be an element of
tariffs that are going to be part of our
lives and are going to be part of
all of these countries and companies
lives
and as a result it really has shifted
[music]
potentially permanently or at least
semi-permanently
the relationship the United States has
with the rest of the world.
>> [music]
>> Well, Tyler, Anna, Andrew, thanks for
coming on the show.
>> [music]
>> Thank you. Thanks so much, Natalie.
Thanks for having us.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
An armed man was shot and killed by law
enforcement officers
>> [music]
>> after he entered the secure perimeter of
Mar-a-Lago early Sunday morning.
The local sheriff identified the man as
Austin Tucker Martin, a 21-year-old from
North Carolina.
>> [music]
>> Authorities say Martin was carrying what
appeared to be a shotgun and a fuel
canister, and that when he was ordered
to drop the items, he put down the
canister, but raised the shotgun to a
shooting position, [music] prompting
officers to open fire.
President Trump wasn't at the resort at
the time. He had [music] hosted state
governors at the White House the night
before.
And [music] heavy snow pounded through
the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic on Sunday
as a major winter storm forced
widespread [music] transit shutdowns and
thousands of flight cancellations.
Over 35 million people from Eastern
Maryland to Eastern Massachusetts were
under [music] blizzard warnings.
More than 2 feet of snow is expected in
parts of New England.
>> [music]
>> If New York City's snowfall hits 18
inches as forecast, it would be the
heaviest in a decade.
The city [music] banned non-essential
travel until noon on Monday, and
officials in New Jersey imposed a travel
ban for most drivers that's expected to
lift around 7:00 a.m. on Monday.
As of Sunday night, [music] most flights
in and out of Kennedy Airport, LaGuardia
Airport, and Newark Airport had been
canceled.
Governors in New York, New Jersey,
Connecticut, Massachusetts, [music]
Maryland, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania,
and Delaware declared states of
emergency.
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wynn and Muj Zaidy. It was edited by
Devon Taylor and Lisa [music] Chow.
Contains music by Marion Lozano and Dan
Powell
>> [music]
>> and was engineered by Chris Wood.
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.